plan.md, before:

# Input Validation Package - Implementation Plan

Based on the detailed requirements, here's my comprehensive plan for implementing the input validation package:

## Progress Status

### ✅ Phase 1 - Core Foundation (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Project structure and exports
- ✅ ValidationRule abstract base class
- ✅ FieldPath implementation with wildcard support
- ✅ ValidationException system with field-specific errors
- ✅ Basic InputValidate class structure
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage for foundation components

### ✅ Phase 2 - Type Validation Rules (COMPLETED)

- ✅ All basic type validation rules (Required, String, Number, Boolean, List, Map)
- ✅ Constraint rules (Min, Max, In)
- ✅ Format rules (Email)
- ✅ Special rules (Nullable)
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage for all rules

### ✅ Phase 3 - Validation Engine (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Basic field validation logic implementation
- ✅ Simple path handling (dot notation without wildcards)
- ✅ Error collection and aggregation
- ✅ Data filtering (return only validated fields)
- ✅ Async rule execution support
- ✅ Comprehensive integration tests

### ✅ Phase 4 - Wildcard Path Expansion (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Wildcard path expansion for array validation
- ✅ Support for nested wildcards (`groups.*.users.*.email`)
- ✅ Proper handling of empty arrays
- ✅ Mixed wildcard and non-wildcard path support
- ✅ Comprehensive array validation tests
- ✅ All 75+ tests passing with full wildcard functionality

### ✅ Phase 5 - Performance Optimizations & Documentation (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Parallel validation with `Future.wait()` for independent field validations
- ✅ Field path caching for improved performance
- ✅ Sequential validation with early termination option
- ✅ Performance optimization parameter (`enableParallelValidation`)
- ✅ Comprehensive API documentation in README.md
- ✅ Complete example implementations covering all features
- ✅ Custom rule creation examples
- ✅ Performance comparison examples
- ✅ All 78+ tests passing with performance features
- ✅ Production-ready documentation and examples

### ✅ Phase 6 - API Improvements & Naming Clarification (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Rename type validation rules for better clarity and consistency:
  - ✅ `StringRule` → `IsStringRule`
  - ✅ `NumberRule` → `IsNumberRule`
  - ✅ `BooleanRule` → `IsBooleanRule`
  - ✅ `ListRule` → `IsListRule`
  - ✅ `MapRule` → `IsMapRule`
- ✅ Update all references throughout the codebase:
  - ✅ Rule implementation files in `lib/src/rules/type_rules.dart`
  - ✅ Export statements in `lib/input_validate.dart`
  - ✅ Test files in `test/input_validate_test.dart` (backward compatibility maintained)
  - ✅ Documentation in `README.md`
  - ✅ Examples in `example/input_validate_example.dart`
- ✅ Maintain backward compatibility with deprecation warnings
- ✅ Update API documentation to reflect new naming convention
- ✅ Verify all tests pass with renamed rules
- ✅ Update plan.md to reflect completion status

**Status:** 🎉 ALL 6 PHASES COMPLETE - Project enhanced with clearer API naming and full backward compatibility

## 1. Project Structure Setup

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create proper folder structure with separation of concerns
- [x] Configure `pubspec.yaml` with required dependencies
- [x] Setup export structure in `lib/input_validate.dart`
- [x] Implement organized folder hierarchy:
  ```
  lib/
  ├── input_validate.dart          # Public API exports
  └── src/
      ├── input_validate_base.dart # Core InputValidate class
      ├── field_path.dart          # Path parsing logic
      ├── rules/                   # All validation rules
      │   ├── validation_rule.dart # Abstract base class
      │   ├── type_rules.dart      # String, Number, Boolean, List, Map rules
      │   ├── constraint_rules.dart # Min, Max, In rules
      │   ├── format_rules.dart    # Email rule
      │   └── special_rules.dart   # Required, Nullable rules
      └── exceptions/              # Exception hierarchy
          └── validation_exception.dart
  ```

## 2. Core Validation Rule System

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement `ValidationRule` abstract base class:

  ```dart
  abstract class ValidationRule {
    String get message;
    FutureOr<bool> passes(dynamic value);
  }
  ```

- [x] Create type validation rules with `const` constructors:

  - [x] `RequiredRule`: Check for null/empty values (handles strings, lists, maps)
  - [x] `IsStringRule`: Type validation for strings (renamed from `StringRule`)
  - [x] `IsNumberRule`: Type validation for numbers (renamed from `NumberRule`)
  - [x] `IsBooleanRule`: Type validation for booleans (renamed from `BooleanRule`)
  - [x] `IsListRule`: Type validation for lists (renamed from `ListRule`)
  - [x] `IsMapRule`: Type validation for maps (renamed from `MapRule`)

- [x] Implement constraint rules:

  - [x] `MinRule`: Minimum value/length constraints (numbers, strings, lists)
  - [x] `MaxRule`: Maximum value/length constraints (numbers, strings, lists)
  - [x] `InRule`: Value membership in allowed set

- [x] Create format validation rules:

  - [x] `EmailRule`: Email format validation using regex

- [x] Implement special rules:
  - [x] `NullableRule`: Allow null values (wrapper rule)

## 3. Field Path Implementation

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create `FieldPath` class to handle dot notation paths:

  ```dart
  class FieldPath {
    final String name;
    bool get isWildcard => name == '*';

    const FieldPath(this.name);

    // Parse path like 'users.*.name' into segments
    static List<FieldPath> parse(String path);

    @override
    String toString() => name;
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement path parsing logic:

  - [x] Split dot-separated strings into segments
  - [x] Handle edge cases (empty strings, multiple dots)
  - [x] Validate path format

- [x] Add wildcard segment handling:
  - [x] Identify wildcard segments (`*`)
  - [x] Implement expansion logic for arrays
  - [x] Handle nested wildcards

## 4. Exception System

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create `ValidationException` abstract base class:

  ```dart
  abstract class ValidationException implements Exception {
    final String message;
    final Map<String, List<String>>? inputErrors;

    const ValidationException(this.message, [this.inputErrors]);

    @override
    String toString() => message;
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement concrete exception classes:
  - [x] `FieldValidationException`: Single field validation failure
  - [x] `MultipleValidationException`: Multiple field validation failures
- [x] Add error collection mechanisms:
  - [x] Aggregate errors by field path
  - [x] Format error messages consistently
  - [x] Handle wildcard path error reporting

## 5. Core Validation Logic

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement `InputValidate` class with static validate method:

  ```dart
  class InputValidate {
    static Future<Map<String, dynamic>> validate(
      Map<String, dynamic> input,
      Map<String, List<ValidationRule>> rules
    );

    // Private helper methods
    static Future<void> _validateField(String path, dynamic value, List<ValidationRule> rules);
    static void _expandWildcardPaths(Map<String, List<ValidationRule>> rules, Map<String, dynamic> input);
    static Map<String, dynamic> _extractValidatedData(Map<String, dynamic> input, Set<String> validatedPaths);
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement field validation logic:

  - [x] Apply rules to appropriate fields
  - [x] Handle async rule execution with `FutureOr`
  - [x] Collect validation errors without fail-fast behavior

- [x] Add wildcard expansion logic:

  - [x] Expand wildcard paths for array validation
  - [x] Handle nested arrays and objects
  - [x] Generate concrete paths from wildcard patterns

- [x] Implement data filtering:

  - [x] Track validated field paths
  - [x] Return only validated fields (strip unvalidated data)
  - [x] Preserve nested structure for validated data

- [x] Add error aggregation:
  - [x] Collect all validation errors before throwing
  - [x] Group errors by field path
  - [x] Format error messages with field context

## 6. Testing Strategy

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create unit tests for validation rules:

  - [x] Test each rule with valid/invalid inputs
  - [x] Test edge cases (null, empty, wrong types)
  - [x] Test rule-specific logic (email format, min/max values)

- [x] Write tests for field path parsing:

  - [x] Test simple paths (`name`, `user.email`)
  - [x] Test wildcard paths (`users.*.name`)
  - [x] Test nested wildcards (`groups.*.users.*.email`)
  - [x] Test edge cases and malformed paths

- [x] Implement integration tests:

  - [x] Test complete validation scenarios
  - [x] Test nested data structures
  - [x] Test array validation with wildcards
  - [x] Test error aggregation and reporting

- [x] Verify core functionality:
  - [x] Test that only validated fields are returned
  - [x] Test async rule execution
  - [x] Test exception throwing and error formatting

## 7. Advanced Features & Optimizations

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement parallel validation:

  - [x] Use `Future.wait()` for independent field validations
  - [x] Maintain proper error aggregation

- [x] Add performance optimizations:

  - [x] Cache compiled field paths
  - [x] Optimize wildcard expansion for large arrays
  - [x] Early termination for required field failures

- [x] Create utility methods:
  - [x] Common validation pattern helpers
  - [x] Rule composition utilities
  - [x] Error message customization

## 8. Documentation & Examples

### Subtasks:

- [x] Add comprehensive API documentation:

  - [x] Document all public classes and methods
  - [x] Include usage examples in doc comments
  - [x] Document wildcard path notation

- [x] Create example implementations:

  - [x] Basic validation example
  - [x] Nested object validation
  - [x] Array validation with wildcards
  - [x] Custom rule creation example

- [x] Update README.md:

  - [x] Installation instructions
  - [x] Quick start guide
  - [x] Feature overview
  - [x] Link to examples

- [x] Add proper logging:
  - [x] Use `log()` from `dart:developer`
  - [ ] Add debug logging for validation process
  - [x] Never use `print()` statements

## 9. Implementation Priority Order

### Phase 1 - Core Foundation:

1. [x] Project structure and exports
2. [x] ValidationRule abstract class
3. [x] Basic type validation rules
4. [x] FieldPath implementation
5. [x] ValidationException system

### Phase 2 - Validation Engine:

1. [x] InputValidate class structure
2. [x] All validation rules implemented (type, constraint, format, special)
3. [x] Basic field validation logic
4. [x] Simple path handling (no wildcards)
5. [x] Error collection and throwing

### Phase 3 - Advanced Features:

1. [x] Wildcard path expansion
2. [x] Array validation
3. [x] Constraint rules (Min, Max, In)
4. [x] Format rules (Email)
5. [x] Special rules (Nullable)

### Phase 4 - Polish & Testing:

1. [x] Comprehensive testing (78+ tests passing)
2. [x] Performance optimizations
3. [x] Documentation
4. [x] Examples and README

### Phase 5 - Post-Launch Improvements:

1. [x] Rename type validation rules for clarity (`StringRule` → `IsStringRule`, etc.)
2. [x] Update all codebase references and maintain backward compatibility
3. [x] Verify test compatibility and documentation updates
4. [x] API improvements successfully implemented with zero breaking changes

## Success Criteria

- [x] All validation rules work correctly with appropriate error messages
- [x] Wildcard paths properly validate arrays and nested structures
- [x] Only validated fields are returned from input data
- [x] All validation errors are collected before throwing exception
- [x] Async rules are properly supported
- [x] Code follows Dart conventions with const constructors
- [x] Comprehensive test coverage (78+ tests passing)
- [x] Clear documentation and examples

Commit message:

Code formatting improvements and plan update
- Improve code formatting for better readability
- Fix long lines to comply with linting standards
- Update plan.md to reflect code quality improvements
- All functionality remains unchanged

plan.md, after:

# Input Validation Package - Implementation Plan

Based on the detailed requirements, here's my comprehensive plan for implementing the input validation package:

## Progress Status

### ✅ Phase 1 - Core Foundation (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Project structure and exports
- ✅ ValidationRule abstract base class
- ✅ FieldPath implementation with wildcard support
- ✅ ValidationException system with field-specific errors
- ✅ Basic InputValidate class structure
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage for foundation components

### ✅ Phase 2 - Type Validation Rules (COMPLETED)

- ✅ All basic type validation rules (Required, String, Number, Boolean, List, Map)
- ✅ Constraint rules (Min, Max, In)
- ✅ Format rules (Email)
- ✅ Special rules (Nullable)
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage for all rules

### ✅ Phase 3 - Validation Engine (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Basic field validation logic implementation
- ✅ Simple path handling (dot notation without wildcards)
- ✅ Error collection and aggregation
- ✅ Data filtering (return only validated fields)
- ✅ Async rule execution support
- ✅ Comprehensive integration tests

### ✅ Phase 4 - Wildcard Path Expansion (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Wildcard path expansion for array validation
- ✅ Support for nested wildcards (`groups.*.users.*.email`)
- ✅ Proper handling of empty arrays
- ✅ Mixed wildcard and non-wildcard path support
- ✅ Comprehensive array validation tests
- ✅ All 75+ tests passing with full wildcard functionality

### ✅ Phase 5 - Performance Optimizations & Documentation (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Parallel validation with `Future.wait()` for independent field validations
- ✅ Field path caching for improved performance
- ✅ Sequential validation with early termination option
- ✅ Performance optimization parameter (`enableParallelValidation`)
- ✅ Comprehensive API documentation in README.md
- ✅ Complete example implementations covering all features
- ✅ Custom rule creation examples
- ✅ Performance comparison examples
- ✅ All 78+ tests passing with performance features
- ✅ Production-ready documentation and examples

### ✅ Phase 6 - API Improvements & Naming Clarification (COMPLETED)

- ✅ Rename type validation rules for better clarity and consistency:
  - ✅ `StringRule` → `IsStringRule`
  - ✅ `NumberRule` → `IsNumberRule`
  - ✅ `BooleanRule` → `IsBooleanRule`
  - ✅ `ListRule` → `IsListRule`
  - ✅ `MapRule` → `IsMapRule`
- ✅ Update all references throughout the codebase:
  - ✅ Rule implementation files in `lib/src/rules/type_rules.dart`
  - ✅ Export statements in `lib/input_validate.dart`
  - ✅ Test files in `test/input_validate_test.dart` (backward compatibility maintained)
  - ✅ Documentation in `README.md`
  - ✅ Examples in `example/input_validate_example.dart`
- ✅ Maintain backward compatibility with deprecation warnings
- ✅ Update API documentation to reflect new naming convention
- ✅ Verify all tests pass with renamed rules
- ✅ Update plan.md to reflect completion status

**Status:** 🎉 ALL 6 PHASES COMPLETE - Project enhanced with clearer API naming and full backward compatibility

## 1. Project Structure Setup

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create proper folder structure with separation of concerns
- [x] Configure `pubspec.yaml` with required dependencies
- [x] Setup export structure in `lib/input_validate.dart`
- [x] Implement organized folder hierarchy:
  ```
  lib/
  ├── input_validate.dart          # Public API exports
  └── src/
      ├── input_validate_base.dart # Core InputValidate class
      ├── field_path.dart          # Path parsing logic
      ├── rules/                   # All validation rules
      │   ├── validation_rule.dart # Abstract base class
      │   ├── type_rules.dart      # String, Number, Boolean, List, Map rules
      │   ├── constraint_rules.dart # Min, Max, In rules
      │   ├── format_rules.dart    # Email rule
      │   └── special_rules.dart   # Required, Nullable rules
      └── exceptions/              # Exception hierarchy
          └── validation_exception.dart
  ```

## 2. Core Validation Rule System

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement `ValidationRule` abstract base class:

  ```dart
  abstract class ValidationRule {
    String get message;
    FutureOr<bool> passes(dynamic value);
  }
  ```

- [x] Create type validation rules with `const` constructors:

  - [x] `RequiredRule`: Check for null/empty values (handles strings, lists, maps)
  - [x] `IsStringRule`: Type validation for strings (renamed from `StringRule`)
  - [x] `IsNumberRule`: Type validation for numbers (renamed from `NumberRule`)
  - [x] `IsBooleanRule`: Type validation for booleans (renamed from `BooleanRule`)
  - [x] `IsListRule`: Type validation for lists (renamed from `ListRule`)
  - [x] `IsMapRule`: Type validation for maps (renamed from `MapRule`)

- [x] Implement constraint rules:

  - [x] `MinRule`: Minimum value/length constraints (numbers, strings, lists)
  - [x] `MaxRule`: Maximum value/length constraints (numbers, strings, lists)
  - [x] `InRule`: Value membership in allowed set

- [x] Create format validation rules:

  - [x] `EmailRule`: Email format validation using regex

- [x] Implement special rules:
  - [x] `NullableRule`: Allow null values (wrapper rule)

## 3. Field Path Implementation

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create `FieldPath` class to handle dot notation paths:

  ```dart
  class FieldPath {
    final String name;
    bool get isWildcard => name == '*';

    const FieldPath(this.name);

    // Parse path like 'users.*.name' into segments
    static List<FieldPath> parse(String path);

    @override
    String toString() => name;
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement path parsing logic:

  - [x] Split dot-separated strings into segments
  - [x] Handle edge cases (empty strings, multiple dots)
  - [x] Validate path format

- [x] Add wildcard segment handling:
  - [x] Identify wildcard segments (`*`)
  - [x] Implement expansion logic for arrays
  - [x] Handle nested wildcards

## 4. Exception System

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create `ValidationException` abstract base class:

  ```dart
  abstract class ValidationException implements Exception {
    final String message;
    final Map<String, List<String>>? inputErrors;

    const ValidationException(this.message, [this.inputErrors]);

    @override
    String toString() => message;
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement concrete exception classes:
  - [x] `FieldValidationException`: Single field validation failure
  - [x] `MultipleValidationException`: Multiple field validation failures
- [x] Add error collection mechanisms:
  - [x] Aggregate errors by field path
  - [x] Format error messages consistently
  - [x] Handle wildcard path error reporting

## 5. Core Validation Logic

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement `InputValidate` class with static validate method:

  ```dart
  class InputValidate {
    static Future<Map<String, dynamic>> validate(
      Map<String, dynamic> input,
      Map<String, List<ValidationRule>> rules
    );

    // Private helper methods
    static Future<void> _validateField(String path, dynamic value, List<ValidationRule> rules);
    static void _expandWildcardPaths(Map<String, List<ValidationRule>> rules, Map<String, dynamic> input);
    static Map<String, dynamic> _extractValidatedData(Map<String, dynamic> input, Set<String> validatedPaths);
  }
  ```

- [x] Implement field validation logic:

  - [x] Apply rules to appropriate fields
  - [x] Handle async rule execution with `FutureOr`
  - [x] Collect validation errors without fail-fast behavior

- [x] Add wildcard expansion logic:

  - [x] Expand wildcard paths for array validation
  - [x] Handle nested arrays and objects
  - [x] Generate concrete paths from wildcard patterns

- [x] Implement data filtering:

  - [x] Track validated field paths
  - [x] Return only validated fields (strip unvalidated data)
  - [x] Preserve nested structure for validated data

- [x] Add error aggregation:
  - [x] Collect all validation errors before throwing
  - [x] Group errors by field path
  - [x] Format error messages with field context

## 6. Testing Strategy

### Subtasks:

- [x] Create unit tests for validation rules:

  - [x] Test each rule with valid/invalid inputs
  - [x] Test edge cases (null, empty, wrong types)
  - [x] Test rule-specific logic (email format, min/max values)

- [x] Write tests for field path parsing:

  - [x] Test simple paths (`name`, `user.email`)
  - [x] Test wildcard paths (`users.*.name`)
  - [x] Test nested wildcards (`groups.*.users.*.email`)
  - [x] Test edge cases and malformed paths

- [x] Implement integration tests:

  - [x] Test complete validation scenarios
  - [x] Test nested data structures
  - [x] Test array validation with wildcards
  - [x] Test error aggregation and reporting

- [x] Verify core functionality:
  - [x] Test that only validated fields are returned
  - [x] Test async rule execution
  - [x] Test exception throwing and error formatting

## 7. Advanced Features & Optimizations

### Subtasks:

- [x] Implement parallel validation:

  - [x] Use `Future.wait()` for independent field validations
  - [x] Maintain proper error aggregation

- [x] Add performance optimizations:

  - [x] Cache compiled field paths
  - [x] Optimize wildcard expansion for large arrays
  - [x] Early termination for required field failures

- [x] Create utility methods:
  - [x] Common validation pattern helpers
  - [x] Rule composition utilities
  - [x] Error message customization

## 8. Documentation & Examples

### Subtasks:

- [x] Add comprehensive API documentation:

  - [x] Document all public classes and methods
  - [x] Include usage examples in doc comments
  - [x] Document wildcard path notation

- [x] Create example implementations:

  - [x] Basic validation example
  - [x] Nested object validation
  - [x] Array validation with wildcards
  - [x] Custom rule creation example

- [x] Update README.md:

  - [x] Installation instructions
  - [x] Quick start guide
  - [x] Feature overview
  - [x] Link to examples

- [x] Add proper logging:
  - [x] Use `log()` from `dart:developer`
  - [ ] Add debug logging for validation process
  - [x] Never use `print()` statements

## 9. Implementation Priority Order

### Phase 1 - Core Foundation:

1. [x] Project structure and exports
2. [x] ValidationRule abstract class
3. [x] Basic type validation rules
4. [x] FieldPath implementation
5. [x] ValidationException system

### Phase 2 - Validation Engine:

1. [x] InputValidate class structure
2. [x] All validation rules implemented (type, constraint, format, special)
3. [x] Basic field validation logic
4. [x] Simple path handling (no wildcards)
5. [x] Error collection and throwing

### Phase 3 - Advanced Features:

1. [x] Wildcard path expansion
2. [x] Array validation
3. [x] Constraint rules (Min, Max, In)
4. [x] Format rules (Email)
5. [x] Special rules (Nullable)

### Phase 4 - Polish & Testing:

1. [x] Comprehensive testing (78+ tests passing)
2. [x] Performance optimizations
3. [x] Documentation
4. [x] Examples and README

### Phase 5 - Post-Launch Improvements:

1. [x] Rename type validation rules for clarity (`StringRule` → `IsStringRule`, etc.)
2. [x] Update all codebase references and maintain backward compatibility
3. [x] Verify test compatibility and documentation updates
4. [x] API improvements successfully implemented with zero breaking changes
5. [x] Code formatting improvements for better readability and lint compliance

## Success Criteria

- [x] All validation rules work correctly with appropriate error messages
- [x] Wildcard paths properly validate arrays and nested structures
- [x] Only validated fields are returned from input data
- [x] All validation errors are collected before throwing exception
- [x] Async rules are properly supported
- [x] Code follows Dart conventions with const constructors
- [x] Comprehensive test coverage (78+ tests passing)
- [x] Clear documentation and examples
